Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this video we
want to talk about divisibility in particular
looking at divisibility of biggest numbers
we want to move towards talking a little bit
about primes and unique factorization and
some problematic issues in that direction
okay so divisibility is of course somehow
intimately connected with multiplication
so here's an example of the product of two
natural numbers here's the number one one one
and here's the number one one one one one and
its product is 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 11 11 11 11 11
using our hindu-arabic shortcut notation for this
thing now I remind you that such a product is
ultimately defined in terms of lots of products
between the entries here so to get this product
what we really do is we multiply each one of
these with each one of those so in particular
we can think about this as being say taking that
first stroke there and multiply it by each one
of the strokes in the second box that'll give us
that collection there and then if we do the same
thing with the second stroke well we get another
collection of five and with the third stroke here
we'll get another collection of five so if we look
at it this way we can see that this three times
five is the sum of these smaller sets of five so
3 times 5 is 5 plus 5 plus 5 and alternatively we
can look at it sort of from the other point of
view we can think about the products as being
organized by taking the first one on the right
hand side and multiply it by each one of these
so there's a product to each other they're giving
us that time set there and then we repeat that for
each one of these five in the second set getting
these five sets of three showing us that 3 times
5 is 3 plus 3 plus 3 plus 3 plus 3 so in each of
these situations we see that the multiplication
and be viewed more simplistically as a kind
of repeated addition and when we say that
15 is divisible by say 5 another way of thinking
about it is that that it's writable as a certain
number of copies of 5 so here's our definition
of division or more precisely of divisibility
so if n and M are natural numbers let's say that
M divides n M divides N and we'll introduce this
notation for that so M with this long vertical
bar n that means M divides n precisely when K
times M equals n for some natural number K in
other words when we can find a natural number K
so when we multiply by M we get n in such a case
we'll say that M divides n so for example here
we could say that 5 divides 15 because 3 times
5 is 15 girls say that 3 divides 15 ok so this
is very standard story we want to talk a little
bit about how this actually works especially for
bigger numbers today all right so for example
this number divides this number because well
we can write this times this 3 as that and one
way of seeing that is that we can sort of peel
off copies of this one here so there's one copy
there's another one there's another one another
one another one another one another one so we
see that we have this many copies of this thing
composing our number in hindu-arabic form we
would say that 3 divides 21 because 7 times 3
is 21 as another example 4 divides the empty m
set which is our 0 since we can find a natural
number that multiplies this 4 to give us the 0
namely the natural number 0 right so 0 times 4
is really 0 or we would say in our hindu-arabic
4 divide 0 since 0 times 4 equals 0 I remind
you that 0 is a natural number in this story so
we have to make sure that our definitions apply
to it sometimes we have to pay a little bit of
special attention to 0 because it's a little bit
different sometimes in particular let's also
have a look at the case of 0 dividing 0 so we
claim that 0 does divide 0 why because well if
we just apply the definition say 2 times 0 is 0
that's how we multiply 2 times 0 is 0 and
so we can say that 0 divides 0 into Arabic
because 2 times 0 equals 0 so notice that
this is a little bit of a strange notation
right usually we don't think about 0 over 0 or
the fraction 0 over 0 we're not really talking
about a fraction now okay we're just talking
about this divisibility of whether one thing
can be expressed as a multiple of something else
and 0 can be expressed as a multiple of 0 so it
makes sense for us to say that 0 actually does
divide 0 that's consistent with our definition
so here's a theorem that summarizes some
important basic facts about divisibility
so suppose we have three natural numbers say K m
and a D so if M divides n then M divides K times n
if M divides K and M divides n then M divides the
sum K plus N and if K divides M and M divides n
then K divides n alright so let me prove the
first one for you and I'll leave the other two
as pleasant exercises for you ok so the first
one we're assuming that M divides N and we want
to show that M divides K times n where K is just
some other natural number so if M divides n then
what does it mean well it means that L times M
equals n for some other L we used K before but
we were already using K so let's use a different
letter say L so M divides n means that we can find
an L so that L times M equals n so it means for
m to divide n no alright then what about this K
if we take this equation here and multiply both
sides by K K times L times M will that obviously
be K times N and then by rearranging and say
eliminating the multiplications just writing
the adjusts the position instead then we get K L
times M equals K n now this K L is also a natural
number because the product of two natural numbers
is a natural number and so we have the situation
that this natural number times M equals K N and
so M divides K n that's what we were trying to
prove that if M divides n then it also divides K
times n ok so it's pleasant to write down proofs
in this direction that demonstrates these other
two loss all right so we have our definition of
divisibility now what about a criterion or a
method to determine whether one number divides
another number so to decide if say M divides n
1 strategy is to successively subtract or remove
copies of M from n until one of two things happens
if nothing remains eventually then M divides N and
if we get a remainder say R which is strictly
positive strictly positive it's actually bigger
than zero but less than M then M does not divide
N and notice that we're introducing this notation
here that with we have the divisibility sign with
a slash through it then this means that M does not
divide n so for example how about this thing here
here's a natural number and we were interested in
does it divide this natural number okay so here's
how we could do that we could and we're being sort
of like primitive people here maybe we don't even
know how to count this far okay and we don't know
the names for these things we just want to know
does this primitive natural number divide this
primitive natural number so what we're going to
do is we're going to take this number here which
I've copied down here and I'm going to see if I
can write it as a multiple of this thing so what
I'm going to do is subtract or take away copies
of this okay so the way I'm going to do that is
sort of sequentially so I'm going to sort of
copy this thing here over here so there's so
well I'm going to count but I don't really have
to count one two three four five six seven so I
just find the first group there that matches
up with what I've got there and then sort of
stop there and start again and now I match this
next group up I think over here and then so I'm
sort of imagining subtracting this from the total
and then subtracting this from the total and now
subtracting another equal number so that's one
two three four five 6:7 I am cheating a little
bit by counting but I don't have to count I can
just match up and once I've done that if I have
done it correctly I see that there are these two
left over okay so we have two left over after
we've subtracted a bunch of these sevens okay
so the answer is no this number does not divide
that because we get a remainder which is not zero
now this is going back quite a ways to the math
foundations eighth lecture where I first started
talking about a division and how to divide one
number by another that's really what we're doing
here okay so this idea that if we want to see if
one number divides another what we're really doing
is we're subtracting that number repeatedly and
seeing what kind of a remainder we get and this
is really effectively the same as long division
and let's have a reminder of how that goes going
back to that math foundations eight video with
this sort of alternate way of doing long division
maybe a sort of simplified way that I proposed at
that time so if we want to divide say two one
six six 2166 by 38 we're interested in whether
38 divides 2166 so our strategy is to divide and
we're going to do that by subtracting multiples of
38 from this okay so there's a bit of judgment
here and it's not necessary to do this in only
one way so we're going to take 38 and have a
look at this and say well we could maybe fit
40 copies of that in here so 40 times 38 make
that multiplication is 1 5 to 0 which good is
less than this so we're going to take 40 copies of
38 away so we do the subtraction we get 6 46 and
now we ask how many 30 eights will fit inside 646
well we don't have to be too accurate let's say we
want to do relatively simple arithmetic so we can
say well 1020 is not going to work but 10 will so
let's subtract 210 38 when we do that we get 266
and how many of these fit inside there well maybe
six of them six times 38 is 228 and we subtract
that we get 38 so we see that there's one more
that we can subtract for a final remainder of 0
so we're successively subtracting multiples of 38
and keeping track of the number of multiples that
we've subtracted as well as the remaining total at
any given time until eventually we try to get as
close as we can to 0 in this case we get all the
way to 0 and then we can count up that the total
number of 38s that we subtracted was 57 so what
we've seen here is that the original number 2166
is 57 times 38 plus a remainder of 0 there's the
remainder not course we don't always have to get
a remainder of 0 that might have been a remainder
of 4 if there was a 4 remaining there we would
replace the 0 with a 4 but in this case there is
a 0 remainder there and so we can say that yes 38
does divide 2166 now I'm aware that many students
these days don't learn long division in school
anymore which is a bit unfortunate and it's true
though that the standard procedure for doing long
division is a little bit complicated it's uh it's
quite involved and I think this procedure that I'm
outlining here is a little bit simpler it's more
forgiving you can make less than optimal choices
and still end up naturally with the right result
at the end so let's have another example here's
a question does 571 divide 30 4098 so the answer
that will divide 30 4090 by 571 so we're going
to ask how many of these can fit into there and
we want to do it in a simple kind of way so maybe
we'll start with 50 because 5 times 5 is 25 which
is sufficiently under 34 as to be sort of on the
safe side so 50 times this well there's a zero
there and then we multiply by five so we get five
35 28 and that is less than this which is good so
when we subtract we get this number five five
four eight now how many of these fit into there
well not quite ten tend to be too many so let's
err on the safe side say eight then eight times
this is eight six five four which is less than
this since when we subtract we get 980 and now we
see that we can subtract one more so we could have
subtracted nine at that stage but doesn't matter
if we just take another step then we subtract
another five seventy one to get I think 409 as
a result so what we can conclude here is that the
total number of 570 ones that we subtracted was 59
we subtracted 59 copies of 571 from our original
so our original 30 4098 is 59 times 571 Plus this
remainder of 409 now this remainder is bigger
than zero but it's less than 571 so we're not
in a position to subtract yet another 571 this is
already less than 571 so we're not obliged to do
anything more the procedure is finished and we can
definitely say that this thing is not divisible
by 571 so 571 does not divide this because of this
remainder that's that's obtained here all right so
let's look at a bigger example how about does this
number divide this number so we definitely shifted
years here to go from natural numbers to numerals
to hindu-arabic numerals right because these are
numbers that are now getting so big that well we
could actually still write them down as natural
numbers but maybe it's nicer for us to think in
terms of the number or the hindu-arabic framework
any case this number well there's the hundreds and
thousands and millions so this is 250 million in
something like that and this here's a zeros and
thousands and millions and billions and trillions
so this is a six hundred nine trillion and so
on okay so does this number divide this number
we could do this by long division we could but my
computer is much faster at and the way I get my
computer to figure out whether there's a division
here is to ask it to calculate this number mod
this number here okay so there's this operation
called the mod operation that my computer knows
about and if I ask my computer what is this it
will spit out this number here and what this
means is this is the remainder after we divide
this number by this number we get a remainder
okay and the remainder is in this case two four
three three one five six six six telling us that
in fact the answer to the original question is no
this does not divide this because if it did then
the remainder would be zero here is the technical
definition of the mod function this will be quite
important for us so the definition of n mod M
equals R say it means that if we divide n by M
the remainder is R so technically that means that
N equals K times M plus R for some natural number
K and such that this remainder is between zero and
possibly zero up to but not including M another
way of saying that is that if you divide n by M
then the remainder is R that's the easy way of
saying what this means n mod M equals R means that
the remainder when you divide n by M is R so here
we took this big number by the small number we got
the remainder that you get when you divide the big
number by the small number so make sure that you
absorb this definition very important definition
going back to the great German mathematician
Carl Friedrich Gauss we'll talk about more next
time all right so let's up the ante a little
bit and move to some bigger numbers let's ask
does 13 divide eight to the eight plus five to
the fifth so notice that this is still in the
realm of natural numbers but it's expressed now
using some mathematical expression these towers
of exponents we could write this out as a natural
number very owners but as a hindu-arabic numeral
it wouldn't be that bad okay so I'm gonna ask
my computer to do this and the way I do that is
I write down 8 the 8 plus 5 to the 5 mod 39 and
I ask it to evaluate that to tell me what is the
remainder if I divide this by 13 and it does so
instantaneously it says that the answer is 6 so
I know that if I divide this number by 13 I get
6 so the answer to the original question is no 13
does not divide 8 to the eighth plus 5 to the
5 all right let's Jack things up a little bit
further and as a similar kind of question does
13 divide 8 to the 81 plus 5 to the 54 okay now
we're getting to numbers which are definitely
pushing the bounds in terms of writing out a
natural number expression for them but in fact
we could still write out a hindu-arabic form for
them not not difficult to do that if we have our
computer to help us so does my computer respond
pleasantly yes it does so my computer will deal
with this very quickly it'll tell me that the
the result of taking this number of Mod 13 is 7 in
other words the remainder that I get when I do by
this number by 13 the remainder is 7 so that means
that the answer here is no 13 does not divide this
now notice that this mod formulation of things
circumvents key part of the earlier calculation
in the long division if we actually divided this
number by 13 using a long division we would end
up getting that this is equal to some multiple of
13 plus 7 so this is the K that would be the sum
of all the multiples of 13 that we've subtracted
right we have to subtract a lot of multiples of 13
from this to get something down to 7 there's gonna
be some huge number and doing this by hand would
be hugely onerous and even asking the computer to
do this I mean the computer can do this but this
number K that it will generate will be very very
long number and won't be expressible in such a
nice fashion like this I'll just get some string
of hindu-arabic digits quite a lot of them but
since I'm not really interested in that in terms
of this problem I'm only interested in whether 13
divides this number and for that I'm really only
interested in the remainder so this mod notation
this mod concept does exactly what we wanted to
do here it tells us what the remainder is without
expressly calculating the quotient K it's a very
clever kind of idea going back to Gauss all right
so let's keep going let's ask a tougher question
does 13 divide Zed Zed is 10 triangle 10 plus 23
our favorite reasonably big number thus 13 divided
said well what do you reckon well the chances are
about about 1 in 13 actually aren't they because
every 13th number is divisible by 13 so if I kind
of just pick a random number chances are
1 in 13 that is actually divisible by 13
so since I've kind of just picked this randomly I
would say there's a one out of 13 chance the Zed
this 10 triangle 10 is of course this thing here's
this tower of tens 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the
10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the 10 to the
10 to the 10 plus 23 and so we want our computer
to evaluate this number mod 13 so I put this into
my computer and I've pressed evaluate and what
does it do this is what it does it does nothing it
just sits there it doesn't know what to do about
this because this number is too big for it to
convert into its usual format saying as a ordinary
hindu-arabic number it can deal with hindu-arabic
numbers which are hundreds or thousands of digits
long that's no problem but unfortunately this is
not just hundreds or thousands of digits long it's
much much longer than that and my computer
cannot deal with it directly in that fashion
so what we can do it we're just going to throw up
our hands and say well we can't compute this well
in fact we can compute this and I'm gonna leave
it to you as an exercise all right so exercise
find this remainder and you don't need to know
any modular arithmetic all what you need to do
is do a little bit of experimentation and think
about this problem so high school students will
be able to answer this question as long as they're
willing to make some investigation let's say okay
so you have to investigate things but you should
be able to with some thought perhaps to calculate
this remainder in any case what we're interested
in is exploring technology like this to be able
to check divisibility for bigger numbers okay so
we want to understand how to check divisibility
even if these both of these numbers are say very
big so in order to do that we need to understand
more deeply this lovely mod operation okay so
we have to connect with carl friedrich gauss
and this is a really key innovation that very
important in modern cryptography very very useful
and important technologies to be able to deal with
this modular arithmetic so that's what we're going
to be doing next time I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening